My Weather Station Explained (26 April 2026)

My weather station has 4 main functional components: computation, networking, applications and sensors.  Positioning of sensors is important for accurate atmospheric boundary layer measurements.  My outdoor wind sensors sit on a 15-foot pole above the roof line at the back of my house.  Not ideal, considering nearby trees, but reasonable.  My rain gauge is half way up the pole, and temperature and humidity sensor is within the white shelter at the bottom of the poles.  All electronics are inside my attic near the outdoor sensors.

Computation.  Computer hardware consists of a Raspberry Pi 5 (RPi5) with 8GB of RAM and a 64GB microSD card running the latest Raspbian Linux-Debian-based operating system.

Networking.  Waveshare Power-over-Ethernet (PoE) “HAT” sits atop of the RPi5 and provides power which allows my RPi5 to be in a location (my attic) without a 110v receptacle.  RPi5 uses a 1Gbps wired Ethernet interface which connects to my PoE Gbps ethernet switch on my home LAN.  Internet access to weather station web pages is graciously provided free of charge by Cloudflare VPN.  No open firewall ports to the internet; only NAT routing.

Applications.  Python3 (my code using various code libraires), MariaDB (my tables and queries), and PHP (my unique code) are used to acquire weather sensor data, calculate derived/summarized data and tendencies, record data in tables, query data for display, and render dynamic web pages of weather-related data that are updated every 5 minutes.

Sensors.  Cup-style anemometer measures horizontal wind speed in knots (nautical miles per hour).  Wind vane determines horizontal wind direction (where the wind is coming from).  Tipping-bucket rain gauge measures rainfall in 0.011-inch increments.  Wind and rain sensors are from Argent Data which provides WR01 interface board that connects to RPi5.  Digital thermistor and hygrometer (SHT30) are housed in a solar radiation shelter (I built) to measure ambient air temperature (F), dew point (F) and relative humidity.  Digital barometer (BME280) measures atmospheric pressure (with adjustments for sea-level).

Anemometer.  This cup-type anemometer measures wind speed by closing a contact as one magnet moves past one reed switch as the anemometer spins in the wind; thus, completing the circuit and counted by WR01.  For example, a wind speed of 1.492 mph (2.4km/hr or 1.3 knots) causes the reed switch to close once per second.  If WR01 counts 10 closures per second, then wind speed is about 15 mph; or 10 times 1.5 mph.

Wind Vane.  The wind vane is somewhat more complicated because it has eight reed switches; each connected to a different resistor.  The vane’s one magnet may close one or two switches at once, allowing up to 16 different wind directions indicated by various voltage on the circuit. The WR01 provides an external resistor to form a voltage divider, producing a voltage output that can be measured with WR01 analog to digital converter.

Rain Gauge.  The tipping-bucket, self-emptying, rain gauge also uses one reed switch and one magnet. As rain fills up one side of a 2-sided bucket (0.011 inch) it tips, the magnet on the bucket causes the reed switch to close; thus, completing the circuit.  Tipping the full bucket automatically empties it.  As rainfall continues, the other side of bucket fills, tips, and counts again.  WR01 counts the number tips per hour, per 24 hours and a running total of tips.  My Python code calculates the difference of the 24-hour total every 5 minutes to derive a 5-min rain rate.

Temperature & Humidity.  The SHT30 sensor is a high-precision digital temperature and humidity sensor that utilizes Sensirion's CMOSens® technology.  It provides fully calibrated, linearized, and temperature-compensated digital output, making it ideal for applications requiring precise and reliable environmental measurements.  The most accurate ambient air temperature/humidity can be achieved by ensuring sensor is not exposed to direct sunlight yet open to sufficient air circulation.  My attempt to achieve this accuracy is by placing the sensor in the middle of my home-made solar radiation shelter.

Detailed Electronics.  A simple bridge connects SHT30 and BME280 interfaces to share Inter-Integrated Circuit (I2C) GPIO pins (#2 & #3), ground and 3.3 volts on RPi5.  WR01 interface connects directly to RPi5 using serial GPIO ports (#14 TXD & #15 RXD), ground and 5 volts on RPi5.  Note: TTL serial RX (receive) port on WR01 connects to GPIO #14 TXD (transmit) on RPi5.  Likewise, TTL TX (transmit) port on WR01 connects to GPIO #15 RXD (receive) on RPi5.

WR-01.  As Argent Data describes their WR01 circuit board: “The WR-01 is a simple yet powerful interface for our wind and rain sensor set.  The WR-01 comes in a rugged, weatherproof enclosure and provides two serial interfaces, a flexible alarm output, and a 0-3.3v analog output.  It allows simple interfacing of weather sensors for programable logic controllers (PLCs), PCs, single-board computers (SBC) including Raspberry Pi, and embedded devices including Arduino.”

Description of Python code to follow soon.
